And I just want to caveat everything. This talk will be focused on R, but know that the
strategies we're going to be talking about are abstract and could apply to any programming
language, Python, etc. So what I'd like for you all to do is picture the scene. You've
just launched your first machine learning model into production as a Plumber API, and
your team loves it. Word gets out over a few weeks, and suddenly other teams want to start
consuming your API as well. Maybe they use it as part of a feature in their Shiny application.
Maybe they use the predictions as a feature in another downstream predictive model. The
point is that your new service, this wonderful service called Appy, has now created value
across various segments of your organization, and you've done the equivalent of a data science
grand slam, and all is good. That is, until it isn't. You show up to work one day, and
the Slack messages start pouring in. It's like, hey man, I was trying to prototype a
new feature in Shiny, and I'm not getting any responses back from your API. What's with
that? Or another team may message you and say, hey, we're getting cascading failures
in our ETL pipeline because we can't get your predictions for our machine learning
model or something like that. So we're starting to struggle at this point. And you and your
manager, you go through the logs and you see that your app is still up, it's still running.
The issue is that it's struggling to handle all of this new traffic that it's receiving.
So this brings us to an important question, which is, how can we make our plumber APIs
more performant? Some of you may be in this talk, and you have never made a REST API before.
Not even sure what REST is. And that's awesome. We're happy to have you here. A quick recap
of what REST is, it's just a URL, but instead of returning a web page, it returns some junk
that looks like this. Which is called JSON. And I want you to just take my word for it
that this powers a lot of the modern web today. API performance is a huge topic that spans
all sorts of ideas. And we won't be able to cover all of them in today's talk. So instead,
we're going to focus on two ideas, two strategies. We're going to talk about minimizing serialization
costs and maximizing responsiveness with async programming. And we're going to cover these
in particular because they will improve your REST API performance. They're relatively they
require relatively minimal code changes, and there's great R packages for implementing
them. So let's move to the first strategy. Minimizing
serialization costs. So when I say that, what does that mean? So the idea here is that serialization
costs are the time it takes for you to take an R object in memory and turn it into some
format that you can send over the wire. Like JSON. Right? You can optimize the business
logic of your API endpoints, but at the end of the day, there's going to be this serialization
cost that you pay to turn your R object that's going to be the API response into JSON.
So there's an opportunity here to focus on to start to zero in on, like, how your objects
are being serialized to see if there's an opportunity to improve performance.
So to think about, like, why this matters, I want you all to consider a scenario. I have
a party, and I'm going to invite 100 people to this party. 200 doesn't matter. And I have
two options. I can either send the invites through a handwritten postcard or I can send
them through e-mail. To send all of these invites through postcard, I have to go get
the postcards. I have to sit there and handwrite 100 postcards. Then I have to put them in
the mailbox and then wait for them to get to their intended recipient. Versus with e-mail,
I can write my message essentially once and then send it to everybody on a distribution
list and because of the Internet, it's essentially instantaneous.
We want our serialization cost to be closer to e-mail than to postcards. Because if we
do that, we're going to be able to return our responses much faster. If we can return
results faster, we're going to be able to handle more requests, things of that sort.
So sounds like a decent deal, good idea. How can we do that? So I have here a simple
example of a Plumber API that uses a, that uses what's called a serializer function to
swap out the defaults and then get a performance boost. So how we go about doing this, the
first step is find a package that serializes JSON faster. Out of the box, Plumber uses
something called JSON Lite, which is a robust battle-tested package. It's great. But in
this example here, I'm using something called YYJSONR, which uses a very fast C library
under the hood to read and write JSON in record times.
So once you've found your package of choice, then what you're going to do is you're going
to write this little function, YYJSONRSerializer, and what that's going to be used is it's going
to be used as a special function that you give to Plumber so it knows how to turn your
R objects into whatever you're serializing it to.
So with that serializer function, from there, it's very simple. You can go ahead and just
use this serializer tag to say that you want to use your new serializer, and then your
endpoint gets an immediate performance boost. There's no need to change the underlying business
logic of your API endpoint. You just get the lift for essentially free.
Now, on this tiny app, you're thinking, like, this isn't a huge deal. But if you can imagine
an API with 100 endpoints, then it starts to become, like, great from a maintenance
standpoint as well, because now I can just change the serializer on my 100 endpoints,
and I get improvement across all of them. So we go back to our little web service, Appy,
and we go ahead and we change out his serializer, and he gets a nice speed boost. He gets a
sick set of roller skates. So now whereas he was trudging along before, now he's gliding
through a little quicker. But we're not done yet. We can improve Appy
even more by using the second strategy that we have here, which is maximizing responsiveness
with async programming. Now, to understand this strategy, we need
to take a quick sidebar to understand how R and Plumber works out of the box. So when
you have our API here on the left and our incoming requests on the right, how does Plumber
process these? R, I mean, Plumber is an R package, and R is single-threaded, meaning
that it can process one instruction at a time. So when those three API requests come in,
your Plumber API is going to munch through each one of them sequentially.
Now for a lot of REST services, this, like, synchronous execution model is perfectly fine.
Especially if you have your API has, like, low to moderate traffic and the end points
are relatively snappy. There's plenty of synchronous web services out there today.
But when your traffic becomes higher, and your end points can vary in terms of their
execution time, then this model of execution can start to get hairy pretty quickly. And
to understand why, I want you to imagine that with these three requests, one is slower than
two and three. Say one takes ten seconds, and two and three take two seconds apiece.
The first request is going to take ten seconds, but now request two doesn't just take two
seconds, it takes 12, because it has to wait for request one to complete. And what's worse,
request three will have to wait a grand total of 14 seconds, because it has to wait for
the other two requests to finish. And you can imagine beyond three requests, you know,
if you're getting hit with a thousand requests, then you're going to start to dog pile your
R process, and it's not going to be a good time.
So we need another execution model. And that's where async programming comes in. I like to
think of async programming as just waiting or executing computations without waiting
for them to complete. But, like, intelligently. It's computational multitasking.
To make it a little more concrete, I want you to imagine, like, two ways of going about
your day. One is that you go, you brew a pot of coffee, you pour yourself a cup, drink
it, then you get your bread, put it in the toaster, and then when it's done, you enjoy
your toast. Versus the way I think the way that a lot of us do it, naturally, is you're
going to wake up, you're going to start a pot of coffee, you're going to throw your
bread in the toaster, and then you're going to wait for each of those things to complete,
and, you know, maybe you'll sip on your coffee while the toast is finishing, but you're ultimately
going to be able to do those two tasks simultaneously without waiting for them to finish.
And so what we want is an execution model that's closer to way two. And that's where
async programming gets us, or what async programming gets us.
So how does this work for something like Appy? So what's going to happen is, instead of having
just one R process that's running our API, what we're going to do instead is we're going
to spin up a certain number of child processes. And what we do then is our main R process
is going to function essentially as, like, a relay, where as the requests come in, our
API will direct them to one of these workers where the requests will actually get processed.
And so in doing this, we end up with this nice effect where request one takes ten seconds,
but now requests two and three now both take two seconds to complete, because they're sent
to dedicated workers and there's no longer a line, essentially.
So that sounds like a good deal. That sounds good. So how do we go about implementing this
in code? So to do that, you may have heard of something called Mirai by now. It's a great
package for doing asynchronous programming, and it's the one we're going to use in this
example. But you may be wondering, well, why not use the future package? The future
package has been around for a while. It's another durable battle-tested package that
works in a variety of contexts, and it was used in the first ‑‑ it has been used
for asynchronous plumber work and whatnot up until today. I'm choosing to use Mirai
in this example for reasons that are kind of like beyond the scope of this talk, but
I'm happy to talk to folks about it later. So how can we go about doing this? So we have
this basic example. It's another hello world example. And the way that we're going to go
about doing this is we're going to use a function called Mirai from Mirai called daemons, which
is going to spin up four workers in this example, four R processes that are going to be lurking
in the background there waiting to do stuff. And then what we're going to do next is our
business logic, okay, and our API endpoint is then going to basically get bundled up
and passed into another Mirai function called Mirai. And what that Mirai function is going
to do is it's going to take the R expression or, like, the business logic that you've
passed it, and it is going to run that code in the child R process.
And then the important thing is that when it's running or after it runs, it's going
to immediately return something. It's going to return something called a promise. And
the way to think about a promise is that it is a placeholder for the eventual result of
a computation. Now, this notion of a promise, I'll kind of hand wave here, but the idea
of a promise is what allows our API process to remain responsive to other incoming requests.
Because when the promise returns or, like, when we get our promise back, the main R thread
is free to do other things, like intercept another inbound request. And the nice thing
about Mirai is that once this promise is ready to go, when there's a result able to
be fetched, it's going to inform the main R process directly, and then R is just going
to send that result back to the client that requested it.
So we go back to Appy, and we instrument some of his code with some async programming inside
of it, and he gets another speed boost. He gets this sick jet pack. So now he's not just
rolling along the street. He's rolling with, like, a Mach 8 engine or something like that,
something real fast. And the end of Appy's story is that with these two strategies, it
was sufficient for the web service to scale to meet the demands that our other teams were
bringing to it, and all is right with the world again.
Now, with that, what have we learned from Appy's story? So just kind of recap. We have
these two strategies that we talked about, which is minimizing serialization costs, you
know, really try to drive down the time it takes to turn our R objects into something
that can be sent over the wire, and two, to keep our main application responsive by
using asynchronous endpoints or async programming in general.
And then there's kind of like this third point that I think underlies, like, the two of these
things, which is, you know, R is much more powerful than you think it is. We have a lot
of sophisticated tooling today that allow us to make very powerful, shiny apps, or in
this case, plumber APIs. So a lot of the times, like, folks on Hacker News may tell you that,
like, R is great for prototyping but not production. They'll tell you to take your API and write
it in, like, Rust or something like that. Myself and other people at this conference
are here to tell you that you don't have to do that. A lot of API design or solid performance
is about solid design, not programming languages. So I encourage you all to take some of these
strategies that I've shown you today and use them in your own projects and see how they
can take your own web services to new heights. So that's me. If any of you would like to
talk about any of this further or just kind of hang here at the conference, I'm happy
to talk to you all. And then there's a QR code here to take you to some of the other
ways that you can get a hold of me. But that's what I got. I'll take any questions you have.
Thank you so much. So we do have time for one question here. So what was the learning
curve to Mirai for someone who hasn't used async programming before? And is future simpler
for a newbie to learn the concept of async? I do think that there is a learning curve
with async. You do have to kind of wrestle with it for a little bit. I think that you
can go either way between Mirai and future. Both of them have just great APIs for, like,
working with them. They're very user-friendly. So you can't go wrong with either one.
Okay. And is there a lot of overhead cost in using Mirai, startup, et cetera?
Yeah. So that's a great question. Because the overhead, right, can come from the idea
where now that we have these other processes, you have to send the data, right, your requests
over to these processes. And there's some overhead with funneling data between processes
on the server. In my experience, like, running some local testing before the conference here,
I actually noticed that with the more recent versions of Mirai, like, the overhead cost
is, like, next to nothing, which is really cool. So I wouldn't worry too much about it.
Amazing. We have one more question here. So does Mirai run on a single thread? If so,
does this affect the user experience and UI responsiveness?
So the important thing is that so with R, everything is always single-threaded. The
idea is that instead of doing multi-threading, we're doing what's called multi-process, which
is where so, like, if you spin up this API with several workers and you open, you know,
like, activity monitor or Windows task scheduler or, like, whatever the monitor is, you'll
see that along with, like, your API process, there will be, like, other R sessions that
are running in the background. So it really shouldn't impact the user experience in the
way that I think, like, multi-threaded code could, but...
Great. And I think we have one more question here. Why are faster serializers not the default
for Plumber? I feel like I might as well just kick that
over to Thomas at this point. Yeah, he's better got ass than me. The only thing that I'll
say is that, you know, choosing default dependencies for packages is a really complex thing, right?
Because certain packages may be really fast, but they may only have, like, one maintainer
that doesn't really work with the project anymore. So you got to choose your dependencies
wisely there. Great. Thank you so much.
Yeah, thank you.